---
title: 8 weeks to 2013 Ironman 70.3 Miami
layout: post
---

h1. 8 weeks to Ironman 70.3 Miami

The last two weeks of training in August have gone well. I managed to reach my highest training totals in swim and bike ever in August, and my highest run total of the year; so, I had reasons to be a happy triathlete. I didn't manage to get in long run/rides as often and far as I wanted to because life got in the way. At the end of the month, everyone at home - wife and two kids - got sick, and I didn't manage to escape the disease. I got flu-like symptoms and am heavily sleep deprived due to taking care of the little ones. So far, I missed a full week of training, and am feeling that I may still need another couple of days to get back in action. If I really get better in two more days, and manage to stay healthy until race day, then, I should be fine for the race, the fitness impact will be minimal.
The main race-related news is that Ironman 70.3 Miami sold out a few days ago, which means that there will be A LOT of people competing on race day, the field limit was set to 3,000 competitors. I haven't participated in a race that busy; so, that will be interesting.

h2. Half Ironman Simulation

The one training session I'm looking forward to in the next few weeks is a Half Ironman simulation that I want to tackle in the next two weeks. The goal is to train for roughly 80% the amount of time I want to finish the race in, albeit below race intensity. I'm planning to swim for 40 minutes, then ride the bike for 3 hours, and run for 1 hour 20 minutes, bringing the day's total to 5 hours.
I think I'll learn a lot from that session. I want to see how my body reacts when it's time to run after a 4 hours effort, and want to practice my nutrition plan, which is far from complex, but I don't want race day to be the first time my body reacts to that amount of calories intake while exercising.
