---
title: 10 weeks to 2013 Ironman 70.3 Miami
layout: post
---

h1. 10 weeks to Ironman 70.3 Miami

After having done a few short triathlons, I felt the need to come up with a new challenge to motivate/scare me to train harder. I signed up for "Ironman 70.5 Miami":http://ironmanmiami.com, it will take place on October 27th 2013. The "Half Ironman":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ironman_70.3 distance includes a 1.2 mile swim, 56 miles bike ride, and a 13.1 miles run, it feels like a perfect challenge at this time, the training required is not completely overwhelming, but one has to respect the distance and put the effort into training to be able to reach the finish line in one piece.

h2. Training

I started the year in maintenance mode, but training came to a halt with my daughter's birth in February. I did put together a 18-weeks training plan to get ready for IM 70.3 Miami; however, life happened, and I was only able to start more focused training 14 weeks out of the race. So far, my training volume has averaged 4 to 5 hours per week, which is on the low side to get ready for a longer race; however, I've been able to train 6 to 8 hours in the last couple of few weeks, and have managed to increase my mileage of long runs and rides, which is key for increasing endurance. I've recently ran "8 miles":http://connect.garmin.com/activity/357003735 and rode the bike for 40 miles twice, which is bringing me close to race distance, all of that in the peak of the South Florida summer. I want to ride and run that long - and a bit more - for at least another 5 weeks, so that I have the confidence that I'll do fine on race day.
